Create Interoperability & crosschain-communication pages - Closes #1516 & #1496 (#1623)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/understand-blockchain/interoperability/communication.adoc

= Cross-chain communication
:toc: preamble

On this page, we dive deeper into the details of how cross-chain communication works in the Lisk ecosystem, by describing the different components and the general processes, and how state changes are executed across chains in the Lisk ecosystem.

== Inducing state changes across chains with CCMs

Cross-chain messages, or CCMs, are the central component of the cross-chain communication between sidechains, and between mainchain and sidechains.

Similar to a normal transaction, a CCM includes a reference to a command that triggers state mutations.

> However, in the case of a CCM, a cross-chain command is specifically used here, which triggers state changes on another chain, a.k.a. the receiving chain.

Reviewer: We should not use periods within the aka acronym. (The other usage of aka in this PR is correct, but I just spotted this one), so it should be as follows:
"However, in the case of a CCM, a cross-chain command is specifically used here, which triggers state changes on another chain, aka the receiving chain".

Author: ```suggestion
However, in the case of a CCM, a cross-chain command is specifically used here, which triggers state changes on another chain, aka the receiving chain.
```

= Cross-chain communication
:toc: preamble

On this page, we dive deeper into the details of how cross-chain communication works in the Lisk ecosystem, by describing the different components and the general processes, and how state changes are executed across chains in the Lisk ecosystem.

== Inducing state changes across chains with CCMs

Cross-chain messages, or CCMs, are the central component of the cross-chain communication between sidechains, and between mainchain and sidechains.

Similar to a normal transaction, a CCM includes a reference to a command that triggers state mutations.

> However in the case of a CCM, the command is a specific command, called cross-chain command, which triggers state changes on another chain, a.k.a. the receiving chain.

Reviewer: imho I would restructure this sentence, as we have 3 instances of 'command' here in one sentence, which I think would sound better if we used something like the following:
"However, in the case of a CCM, a cross-chain command is specifically used here, which triggers state changes on another chain, a.k.a. the receiving chain".

status:: The basic error handling for routing messages to other chains is done by the mainchain.
Information about the reason why the message failed is stored in the status property.
For example, in the case the receiving chain does not exist, is not active or has been terminated, the mainchain will return the message to the sending chain.
The sending chain can then revert the message and potentially refund users.
To allow for future updates or improvements of the Interoperability module, other modules are restricted from using status codes up to 63 (included).
Other modules may use other status codes larger or equal to 64.

:sectnums:
== Sending cross-chain transactions to generate CCMs

Let's look at an example of a simple cross-chain transfer between Alice and Bob.

image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-1.png[,300,role="right"]

Alice has 10 LSK in her account on a chain called "Sidechain X".
In this context, we refer to Sidechain X as the sending chain.

She wants to transfer 5 LSK to Bob, who has an account on another chain, "Sidechain Y", in this context the receiving chain.

Here is where *cross-chain transactions (CCTs)* come into play.

> NOTE: A cross-chain transaction (CCT) is a transaction that, upon its execution, creates one or more cross-chain messages.
> 
> In fact, a cross-chain transaction uses the identical schema as normal transactions.
> The only difference is that a CCT refers to a **cross-chain command**, instead of a normal command.

Author: Sorry, i meant CC-transaction, not CC-command. So, the original statement is correct then?
I would clarify as follows: 

```suggestion
NOTE: A cross-chain transaction (CCT) is a transaction that, upon its execution, creates one or more cross-chain messages.

In fact, a cross-chain transaction uses the identical schema as normal transactions, but it refers to a cross-chain command instead of a regular command.
Unlike regular commands, cross-chain commands can create CCMs.
```

A cross-chain command will perform the following:

> * execute the necessary changes on the sending chain (i.e. removing 5 LSK from Alices balance), and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* execute the necessary changes on the sending chain (i.e. removing 5 LSK from Alice's balance), and
```

> * also create CCMs to trigger the corresponding state changes in the receiving chain (i.e. add 5 LSK to Bobs balance).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* also create CCMs to trigger the corresponding state changes in the receiving chain (i.e. add 5 LSK to Bob's balance).
```

Therefore, to initiate the cross-chain token transfer, Alice sends a corresponding cross-chain transfer transaction on the sending chain X.

> In the example, the CC-transfer will deduct 5 LSK from Alices balance once the transaction is included in a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example, the CC-transfer will deduct 5 LSK from Alice's balance once the transaction is included in a block.
```

--

=== Mainchain to sidechain

[.float-group]
--
image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-3.png[,300,role="right"]

After the CCM is included in the inbox of the mainchain in step <<sidechain-to-mainchain>>, the mainchain performs the most important validations on the CCM.

If the validation on the mainchain is passed successfully, the CCM is added to the outbox of the mainchain, ready to be picked up by a relayer.

A relayer on the mainchain will include the CCM in a CCU and post it to the sending chain.

Relayers should post cross-chain update transactions on the sidechain when the need for it arises.
This can be either because some CCMs have been included in the outbox and need to be relayed, or when the mainchain validators changes require the channel to be updated on the sidechain.

--

== Executing the cross-chain command on the receiving chain

[.float-group]
--
image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-4.png[,300,role="right"]

Once the CCM is included in the inbox on the receiving chain Y, the remaining validations of the CCM are performed.

> If the validation is completed successfully, the cross-chain command is performing the intended state changes on the receiving chain, i.e. adding 5 LSK to Bobs account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the validation is completed successfully, the cross-chain command is performing the intended state changes on the receiving chain, i.e. adding 5 LSK to Bob's account.
```

=== CCM validation in the Mainchain

[.float-group]
--
image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-2b.png[,300,role="right"]

When a CCU is relayed from a sending chain to the mainchain, the mainchain checks for all CCMs in the inbox update, if the following criteria are met:

* the receiving chain exists.
* the receiving chain has the status `active`.
* `sendingchain-ID` of the CCM equals the chain ID of the sending chain.

If the validation fails, the `status` of the CCM is updated by the mainchain with the corresponding error code.

If the status is NOT OK, the CCM will NOT be forwarded to the receiving chain.
Instead, the CCM is added to the outbox of the sending chain, i.e., it will eventually be included in a new CCU and posted *back to the sending chain.*

The sending chain may then revert the state changes related to the CCM that happened on the sending chain.

For example, if Alice on Sidechain X sends 5 LSK to Bob on Sidechain Y, but Sidechain Y is not registered on the mainchain, the error handling process would function as follows:

> . Alice sends CC-Transfer: 5 LSK + Fee is deducted from Alices balance on Sidechain X.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Alice sends CC-Transfer: 5 LSK + Fee is deducted from Alice's balance on Sidechain X.
```

=== CCM validation in the receiving chain

[.float-group]
--

[.right]
image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-3b.png[,300]

When a CCU is relayed from the mainchain to the receiving chain, the receiving chain checks for all CCMs in the inbox update, if the following criteria are met:

* the receiving application understands the particular command, i.e. it includes the required module to interpret the command name.
* the CCM includes all parameters required for the CC-command.

If the validation fails the `status` of the CCM is updated by the receiving chain with the corresponding error code.

If the status is NOT OK, the state changes of the CCM will NOT be performed on the receiving chain.
Instead, the CCM will be added to the outbox of the mainchain on the receiving chain.
Thus, the CCM will eventually be included in a new CCU and posted *back to the mainchain*, and from there to the sending chain.

Once the CCM is added to the inbox of the sending chain, it may then revert the invalid state changes.

For example, if Alice on Sidechain X sends 5 LSK to Bob on Sidechain Y, but Sidechain Y does not support the token module, the error handling process would function as follows:

> . Alice sends CC-Transfer: 5 LSK + Fee is deducted from Alices balance on Sidechain X.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Alice sends CC-Transfer: 5 LSK + Fee is deducted from Alice's balance on Sidechain X.
```

. Mainchain receives corresponding CCM & performs validations.
. Mainchain relays CCM to the receiving chain via a CCU.
. Sidechain does not support module: CCM status is updated to `MODULE NOT SUPPORTED` on the receiving chain.
. Errored CCM is relayed back to the mainchain.
. Errored CCM is relayed back to the sending chain.

> . Sending chain undoes related state changes: 5 LSK are added back to Alices account, because the cross-chain transfer was unsuccessful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Sending chain undoes related state changes: 5 LSK are added back to Alice's account, because the cross-chain transfer was unsuccessful.
```

--

== Complete cross-chain-communication flow

To summarize, the complete flow of cross-chain communication is described in the diagram below:

.Overview: Cross-chain communication flow

> image::understand-blockchain/interop/cc-communication-flow.png[]

Reviewer: In this image, I think caption '6b' should read as the following:

"If validation fails:  Status of the CCM is set to error and it is posted back to the sending chain"

For example, in the case the receiving chain does not exist, is not active or has been terminated, the mainchain will return the message to the sending chain.
The sending chain can then revert the message and potentially refund users.
To allow for future updates or improvements of the Interoperability module, other modules are restricted from using status codes up to 63 (included).
Other modules may use other status codes larger or equal to 64.

:sectnums:
== Sending cross-chain transactions to generate CCMs

Let's look at a example of a simple cross-chain transfer between Alice and Bob.

image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-1.png[,300,role="right"]

Alice has 10 LSK in her account on a chain called "Sidechain X".
In this context, we refer to Sidechain X as the sending chain.

She wants to transfer 5 LSK to Bob, who has an account on another chain, "Sidechain Y", in this context the receiving chain.

Here is where *cross-chain transactions (CCTs)* come into play.

NOTE: A cross-chain transaction (CCT) is a transaction that, upon its execution, creates one or more cross-chain messages.

In fact, a cross-chain transaction uses the identical schema as normal transactions.

> The only difference is that a CCT refers to a **cross-chain command**, instead of a normal command.

Author: If this is true, then there is no real difference between a cc-comand and a regular command, so the distinction wouldn't make any sense. But at many points we talk about a cross-chain-command. So if there is no difference, I would suggest to completely refrain from using the term CC-command, or cross-chain command.

> The only difference is that a CCT refers to a **cross-chain command**, instead of a normal command.

Reviewer 2: There is a difference between cc-command and regular command: cc-commands are triggered by CCMs whereas regular commands are triggered by transactions.

My previous statement about the "difference of transaction and cc-transaction" was also not correct. Because they are not different concepts. A cc-transaction is just a specific transaction. That is: A transaction `T` is a cc-transaction if it can create some CCMs.

All CCMs and witnesses for heights that have been certified on the sidechain can be discarded.
.. Maintain a history of all validator changes on the mainchain for rounds that have not yet been certified on the sidechain.
. Create a cross-chain update transaction for a given height `h1`:
.. Find a signed certificate in the mainchain block headers for a height (say `h2`) higher or equal to `h1`.
This will be used as the `certificate` property of the transaction.
.. The property `inboxUpdate.crossChainMessages` lists all CCMs that have been included in the sidechain outbox up to `h2` (and which have not been included on the sidechain yet).
In this case, the `messageWitness` will be empty.
.. Compute the inclusion proof for the outbox root of the sidechain account into the mainchain state root.
This proof is then used to compute `inboxUpdate.outboxRootWitness`.
.. Compute the required update to the active validators stored in the chain account and the validators that were used to create `certificate.validatorsHash`.
//This update can be obtained by following the logic of `getActiveValidatorsDiff` as detailed in the Appendix.

> .. If the certificateThreshold used to create `certificate.validatorsHash` is different from the one stored in the chain account, include the new value in the `newCertificateThreshold` property.

Reviewer 2: this one is still open

.. Post the cross-chain update transaction on the sidechain.

=== Sidechain to mainchain

[.float-group]
--
image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-2.png[,300,role="right"]

> After the CCM has been created in step <<using-cross-chain-transactions-to-generate-ccms>>, it is added to the outbox of the sending chain X.

Author: fixed the internal link

> From the outbox, a *relayer* collects the CCMs and creates a CCU with the properties described in step <<transferring-ccms-in-a-ccu>>.

Author: fixed 👍

A *relayer* is a blockchain node that collects CCMs in a CCU and, as the name suggests, relays them cross-chain.

The role of relayer is totally symmetric for relaying information from a sidechain to the mainchain.

When the relayer posts a CCU, the included CCMs will be added to the inbox of the mainchain, and processed further from there.

NOTE: Because all information to create CCUs is publicly available, anyone can assume the role of a relayer in the network, and create and post CCUs to other chains.
--

=== Mainchain to sidechain

[.float-group]
--
image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-3.png[,300,role="right"]

> After the CCM is included in the inbox of the mainchain, the mainchain performs the most important validations on the CCM.

Author: added a link to the previous section, where this is explained

If the validation on the mainchain is passed successfully, the CCM is added to the outbox of the mainchain, ready to be picked up by a relayer.

A relayer on the mainchain will include the CCM in a CCU and post it to the sending chain.

Relayers should post cross-chain update transactions on the sidechain when the need for it arises.
This can be either because some CCMs have been included in the outbox and need to be relayed, or when the mainchain validators changes require the channel to be updated on the sidechain.

--

> == Executing the CCC on the receiving chain

Author: Interesting, I thought it was. So it is valid to say that the CCM is executed? Because I thought a CCM is only an envelope for a corss-chain command, as described above in line 15.

.CCM status codes
[cols="2,1,1,4"]
|===
|Status|Type|Value|Description
|OK|uint32|0|The default status of a cross-chain message.
|MODULE NOT SUPPORTED|uint32|1|Status assigned on the receiving chain if it does not implement any module with ID equal to the message module ID.
|CROSS CHAIN COMMAND NOT SUPPORTED|uint32|2|Status assigned on the receiving chain if it does not implement any command with ID equal to the message command ID.
|CHANNEL UNAVAILABLE|uint32|3|Status assigned on the mainchain if the receiving chain is not available (it does not exist, it is not active, or it has been terminated).
|RECOVERED|uint32|4|Status assigned on the mainchain to a cross-chain message after it has been recovered from the outbox of a terminated sidechain.
|===

The status code provides crucial information to the blockchain application on how to process/forward a CCM.

Mainchain and receiving chain each perform different validity checks on the CCM, and in turn each add their specific status codes to a CCM, if the validation failed.

=== CCM validation in the Mainchain

[.float-group]
--

> image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-2b.png[,300,role="right"]

Author: thanks for clarification! This step was not clear to me before.

When a CCU is relayed from a sending chain to the mainchain, the mainchain checks for all CCMs in the inbox update, if:

* the receiving chain exists
* the receiving chain has the status `active`.
* `sendingchain-ID` of the CCM equals the chain ID of the sending chain.

If the validation fails, the `status` of the CCM is updated by the mainchain with the corresponding error code.

If the status is NOT OK, the CCM will NOT be forwarded to the receiving chain.
Instead, a relayer on the mainchain will include the CCM in a new CCU and post is *back to the sending chain.*

The sending chain may then revert the state changes related to the CCM that happened on the sending chain.

For example, if Alice on Sidechain X sends 5 LSK to Bob on Sidechain Y, but Sidechain Y is not registered on the mainchain, the error handling would work as follows:

. Alice sends CC-Transfer: 5 LSK + Fee is deducted from Alices balance on Sidechain X.
. Mainchain receives corresponding CCM & performs validations
. Mainchain cannot find the receiving chain: CCM status is updated to 3 (`CHANNEL_UNAVAILABLE`) on the mainchain.
. Errored CCM is relayed back to the sending chain.

> . Sending chain undoes related state changes: 5 LSK are added back to Alice's account, because the cross-chain transfer was not successfull.

Author: ```suggestion
. Sending chain undoes related state changes: 5 LSK are added back to Alice's account, because the cross-chain transfer was unsuccessful.
```

NOTE: Alice always needs to pay the fee for the cross-chain transfer, even if it fails.
--

=== CCM validation in the receiving chain

[.float-group]
--

[.right]

> image:understand-blockchain/interop/ccc-3b.png[,300]

Reviewer 2: 1. Also here, I would visualize that the failed CCM is added to the outbox on Sidechain Y and on the mainchain.
2. The text for step 12b is using "7b" instead of "12b". The same holds for 13b.
3. In step 13b, one talks about "CCM1", but in all other places just about "CCM". This should be aligned.

Reviewer 2: the "." is missing after "12b" and "13b" in the text boxes

When a CCU is relayed from the mainchain to the receiving chain, the receiving chain checks for all CCMs in the inbox update, if the following criteria are met:

* the receiving application understands the particular command, i.e. if it includes the required module to interpret the command name.
* the CCM includes all parameters required for the CC-command.

If the validation fails the `status` of the CCM is updated by the receiving chain with the corresponding error code.

> If the status is NOT OK, the CCM will NOT be processed to the receiving chain.

Reviewer 2: or you could also say that the respective cross-chain command is not executed.

Instead, a relayer on the receiving chain will include the CCM in a new CCU and post it *back to the mainchain*, and from there to the sending chain.

Once the CCM is added to the inbox of the sending chain, it may then revert the invalid state changes.

For example, if Alice on Sidechain X sends 5 LSK to Bob on Sidechain Y, but Sidechain Y does not support the token module, the error handling process would function as follows:

. Alice sends CC-Transfer: 5 LSK + Fee is deducted from Alices balance on Sidechain X.
. Mainchain receives corresponding CCM & performs validations.
. Mainchain relays CCM to the receiving chain via a CCU.

> . Sidechain does not support module: CCM status is updated to 1 (`MODULE_NOT_SUPPORTED`) on the mainchain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Sidechain does not support module: CCM status is updated to `MODULE NOT SUPPORTED` on the receiving chain.
```

. Errored CCM is relayed back to the mainchain.
. Errored CCM is relayed back to the sending chain.
. Sending chain undoes related state changes: 5 LSK are added back to Alices account, because the cross-chain transfer was unsuccessful.

--

== Complete cross-chain-communication flow

To summarize, the complete flow of cross-chain communication is described in the diagram below:

.Overview: Cross-chain communication flow

> image::understand-blockchain/interop/cc-cmmunication-flow.png[]

Reviewer 2: 1. Also here, I would visualize that the failed CCM is added to the outbox on Sidechain Y and on the mainchain.
2. in the text in step 2, ")" is missing at the end
3. In step 6a, I would be more precise: "...to the outbox of Sidchain Y". I would also say "CCM" instead of "CCMs".
4. for steps 7a to 10a, the texts are using "7" to "10" instead of "7a" to "10a"
5. step 8b is talking about "CCM1", all other steps about "CCM"

Author: Concerning step 6a, I think it is correct to say `to the outbox of the mainchain` - I have updated it accordingly.

Reviewer 2: 1. regarding 6a: the mainchain can have several outboxes (one per sidechain). so, "the outbox of the mainchain" is not correct. you could say "an outbox" or "the outbox of Sidechain Y (on the mainchain)"
2. the "." is missing after "7b" and "8b" in the textboxes

Reviewer 2: the "." is still missing after "7b" and "8b" in the textboxes

NOTE: A cross-chain transaction (CCT) is a transaction that, upon its execution, creates one or more cross-chain messages.

> A cross-chain command will perform the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A cross-chain transaction will perform the following:
```

NOTE: A cross-chain transaction (CCT) is a transaction that, upon its execution, creates one or more cross-chain messages.

> In fact, a cross-chain transaction uses the identical schema as normal transactions, but it refers to a cross-chain command instead of a regular command.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, a cross-chain transaction uses the identical schema as normal transactions.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe even better: "In fact, a cross-chain transaction is a normal transaction." Because the current formulation may suggest that they only use the same schema but that cc-transactions are not transactions. See also [this outdated discussion](https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-docs/pull/1623#discussion_r991108227).

Author: ```suggestion
In fact, a cross-chain transaction is a normal transaction.
```

> Unlike regular commands, cross-chain commands can create CCMs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike regular transactions, cross-chain transactions can create CCMs.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not even sure if this line and the one above is needed as they more or less just repeat the NOTE from line 65. Or the note could be removed.

Author: removed the lines now

image::understand-blockchain/interop/ccu.png[,300,role=right]

sending chain ID:: Identifies the chain sending the cross-chain update.
Only cross-chain update transactions coming from registered chains are valid, registered chains are the ones with an entry in the interoperability store corresponding to their `chainID`.
active validators update:: The chain account stores an array containing the BLS keys and BFT weights required to validate the certificate signature.

> This array has to be updated if the set of active validators changes in the chain sending the certificate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This array has to be updated if the set of active validators changes in the chain sending the CCU.
```

Reviewer 2: I think this suggestion was missed in the previous round. Or ignored for some reason?

Author: missed it somehow, thx!

The difference between the stored array and the new one is included in this property.
certificate:: Authenticates the data sent in the CCU.
It contains an aggregate signature of a set of the current validators of the sending chain.
Anyone can obtain the full certificate from the blockchain by obtaining the corresponding block header, computing the unsigned certificate, and then obtaining the `aggregateCommit` once the block is finalized.

> certificate threshold:: The threshold of block generators required to validate the certificate signature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
certificate threshold:: The threshold of block generators in terms of BFT weight required to validate the certificate signature.
```
